when a computer starts up it loads an
operating system also known as an OS a
program for managing the hardware and
running other programs in OS terminology
a running program is called a process
and it is the OSS responsibility to keep
the processes from interfering with one
another even as they run on the same
system at the same time it's also the
OSS job to provide an interface to the
hardware for the processes such that the
OS retains old direct control of the
hardware devices with the processes only
interacting with the devices via so
called system calls provided by the OS
the OS also provides a file system which
abstract over the storage devices such
that processes can read and write files
without concern for how precisely they
get stored
lastly the OS provides a user interface
for users to run programs and manage the
file system the most widely used
operating system for PCs today is of
course Microsoft's Windows the most
recent version for client pcs is Windows
8 and the variant for servers is Windows
Server 2012 the main alternatives to
Windows are all descendants of the UNIX
operating system which was created in
the early 1970s these descendants don't
use any actual code from the original
UNIX but they share some common
structure and conventions both linux and
bsd short for berkeley software
distribution are unix-like operating
systems that are free and open source
and developed by a scattered community
around the world Apple's OS 10 was
originally based on a variant of BSD but
is itself proprietary and only legally
available for Apple's own computers even
though the underlying apple hardware is
the same as standard PC hardware except
when we discuss file systems all the
information in this unit will be
platform agnostic applicable to both
Windows and UNIX systems
a device driver is a plug-in module of
the OS that handles the management of a
particular i/o device some standardized
devices may function with a generic
driver eg a USB mouse may perform old
common USB mouse functionality with a
driver written for a generic USB mouse
however many devices require more
specific driver for example in my system
using the generic graphic strawberry
provided by Windows only provides bare
minimum functionality to run high
resolutions and play games
I must install the driver provided by
AMD for my Radeon graphics card
a primary purpose of modern operating
systems is to allow for multiple
processes to run concurrently meaning at
the same time the problem of course is
that each CPU core can only execute the
code of one process at a time and the
OSS own code can't run on a core at the
same time as any process the solution
then is to have each CPU core alternate
between running each open process and
alternate running processes with running
OS code so here if we have two CPU cores
and three open processes a B and C
notice that each process only runs on
one core at a time at no point does say
process B run simultaneously on both of
the two cores also notice that OS code
always runs on each core in between each
process what's happening here is that a
portion of the OS called the scheduler
runs after each process to decide what
OS work if any should be done and which
process should run next the question
then is how does the currently running
process get interrupted left on its own
a running process would continue
indefinitely when any hardware interrupt
is triggered however the interrupt
handler passes off control to the
scheduler rather than handing the
processor core back to the interrupted
process the scheduler then decides what
OS code to run if any and what process
should run next laid out in full the
scheme called pre-emptive multitasking
works like this first the CPU receives
some hardware interrupts then the
interrupt stores the program counter so
that the interrupted code can resume
later the interrupt invokes the
appropriate handler the handler itself
saves the state of the other CPU
registers so that the interrupted
process can be resumed later the handler
does whatever business the interrupting
device needs the handler then invokes a
scheduler and the scheduler selects a
process to run the scheduler then
restores the CPU registers to the state
they were in when that process was last
running so that that process may
continue and finally the scheduler jumps
execution to that process you may now be
wondering two things first what if no
interrupt is triggered by any device for
a long time that would allow the
currently running process to hog the CPU
when generally we want each process to
at least get a little time on a regular
basis say every several seconds or so a
videogame for example typically can't go
without CPU time for more than a
fraction of a second so it would be no
good if some other process ran without
interruption for a second or more
to ensure that the scheduler gets to run
on a regular basis whether any i/o
devices need attention or not a clock
device on the mainboard is configured to
send an interrupt on a regular basis say
once every 10 or 20 milliseconds thus
the system guarantees that the scheduler
gets the opportunity to change the
running process on each core at least
several times a second the next thing
you might wonder is how the scheduler
chooses which process to run next using
the simplest algorithm the round-robin
algorithm the scheduler simply runs each
process in turn one after the other
while this ensures that every process
gets run on a regular basis the more
sophisticated algorithms used by Windows
Linux and other modern operating systems
attempt to take into account which
crosses season each processor time more
than others
processes not only share the CPU cores
the of course must also share the system
memory
it's the OSS job to regulate the
processes use of memory to ensure that
each process doesn't interfere with the
portions of memory used by other
processes and by the OS itself here for
example the processes a B and C have
been allocated their own portions of
system memory while the OS may access
any portion of memory as it chooses
because the OS is supposed to be in
charge of the system each process can
only access its own portion of memory as
we'll explain shortly this restriction
is enforced by the hardware making it
impossible for a process to muck with
addresses outside of its own portion of
memory however we need a loophole for
this restriction because processes must
be able to invoke certain routines at
fixed addresses in the OSS portion of
memory these routines called system
calls are the means by which processes
initiate requests to the operating
system these system calls provide
functionality for things like say
reading and writing files or for sending
and receiving data over the network to
invoke a system call a process must use
a specific CPU instruction usually
called Cisco in which the process
specifies a system call number when this
instruction is invoked the processor
looks in the system called table for the
address of the routine corresponding to
the number and jumps execution to that
address because the operating system
controls the system call table a process
can only jump execution to addresses of
the operating systems choosing so aside
from this loophole how do the operating
system and hardware restrict the process
to only access its own portion of memory
well first off the CPU actually runs in
two different privilege levels when OS
code runs the CPU is put into a
privilege level that allows access of
the i/o devices and any address of
memory when a process runs however the
CPU is put into a privileged level that
triggers a Hardware exception when the
code attempts to directly access the i/o
devices or addresses not allowed for
that process processes are supposed to
directly touch only their own memory not
anything else in the system now to
understand how the CPU knows which
addresses are allowed for each process
we have to first look at how a process
uses memory
each process uses a portion of its
memory for a stack for a heap and for
storing the processes code itself in a
section confusingly called the text
section even though the code is in
binary form the code section is
straightforward the binary instructions
are stored in a contiguous chunk of
memory and never modified for the
duration of the process except for the
purpose of dynamic linking with shared
libraries as we described in the unit on
programming languages the stack and heap
though are both for storing data the
difference is that the stack stores the
local variables used by the process and
the heap stores everything else looking
at the stack first the stack is a
contiguous chunk of memory that starts
out unused when the first function is
called let's call it main it's local
variables are stored on the stack in a
grouping called a frame when the main
function itself invokes another function
let's call it cat the local variables of
cat are stored in another frame on top
along with the size of the frame and the
return address the address to jump back
to when execution returns from cat
likewise if cat calls another function
dog then dogs local variables the size
of its frame and the return address to
cat are stored in another frame on top
notice that as we add frames we have to
keep track at the top of the stack
because that's where we add a frame when
the next function is cold
many CPUs including x86 CPUs have a
specific register for storing this
address usually called the stack pointer
when a function returns the frame size
is used to adjust the stack pointer back
down to the last frame and execution
jumps back to the return address so when
dog returns execution returns the cat
and the stack pointer will point to the
top of cats frame notice that we don't
have to actually delete any frames
because the space of frame occupies will
simply get overwritten by subsequent
frames as needed also notice that the
first frame is special because the
program ends when the first function
returns so the first frame needn't store
its size or any return address because
there's nothing to return to now the
diagram here suggests that the stack
grows from the bottom but in many cases
the stack frames start at high memory
addresses and grow downwards this in
fact is the case with x86 CPUs this
choice though is mostly arbitrary the
size of
stack space in some systems is kept
track of with another pointer usually
called the stack boundary kept in
another CPU register in CPUs with this
register when the stack pointer runs
past the stack boundary this triggers a
hardware exception and the exception
handler may increase the stack space by
moving the stack boundary
however the exception handler may decide
at some point that the stack has grown
too large and may simply refuse and then
instead simply terminate the process
generally the processes stack should
only get so big a megabyte or two at the
high end when stacks grow past this size
it's generally a sign of an underlying
programming error that should be
corrected not accommodated the most
common cause of an overly large stack is
an overly long chain of recursive
function calls when the program exceeds
its available stack space the error is
called a stack overflow when a stack
overflow occurs on the PC the OS usually
terminates the errant process and very
simple computers however such as in
embedded systems the stack size is not
necessarily monitored with a stack
boundary and so when a program consumes
more stack space than it should the
stack may poke into parts of memory used
for other data or code likely causing
unpredictable bugs
the common arrangement in pcs is to
store the stack at the top of a
processes address space and the text the
code of the process at the bottom all
the remaining space in between is
available for the heap
unlike the stack in text however no heap
space exists when the process starts
executing instead the process must
explicitly request chunks of heap
storage from the OS with a system coal
in the coal the process specifies what
size contiguous chunk at once but the OS
decides where to locate these chunks in
the address space and the chunk
locations are not necessarily adjacent
when a process is done with a chunk of
heap it should give the chunk back to
the OS with a system call to deallocate
it is the responsibility of the OS to
keep track of which portions of the
address space are free for future
allocations but notice that as a process
allocates and D allocates chunks in
memory the memory space can become more
and more fragmented effectively
shrinking the size of heat chunks which
the OS can allocate because each chunk
must be contiguous here for example the
largest heap chunk which the OS could
allocate is considerably smaller than
the amount of free space remaining good
allocation algorithms can minimize this
fragmentation but the problem can't be
avoided entirely this partly explains
why you should deallocate chunks of heap
when you no longer need them by D
allocating you free up areas in the
address space so that they can be
allocated again later the broader reason
to deallocate of course is that your
process might simply run out of address
space at some point even if your process
only needs a modest amount of heat
memory at any one time if your process
runs long enough without properly the
allocating heap memory the process may
eventually run out of address space at
which point new allocations will fail
likely requiring your process to
terminate prematurely so failing to
properly allocate unneeded heap memory
is generally regarded as a bug called a
memory leak because the memory available
to your program effectively dwindles
away over time we'll discuss this issue
in more detail on the unit on
programming languages the memory
of a process do not actually refer
directly to actual bytes of system
memory instead chunks of the process
address space are mapped by the
operating system to chunks of system
memory but not necessarily contiguous
Lior in the same order here for example
the stack is mapped to one area of RAM
in the middle the code section is mapped
to another non adjacent area of RAM
above it and the portions of heap are
mapped in non adjacent parts of RAM in a
seemingly random order when the OS runs
a process it lists these address
mappings in a table and as the process
runs the CPU consults this table to
translate from process addresses to
addresses of actual RAM for example if
the chunk of process address space
starting at address 0 is mapped to byte
ffff 0 0 0 0 of RAM then address 5 of
the process address space translates to
byte ffff 0 0 0 5 of RAM be clear that
each process has its own complete
address space and that the OS keeps a
separate memory table for each process
effectively then the process can be
located by the OS in any part of RAM and
each process can only access its own
memory not the memory of other processes
or memory used by the OS when a process
attempts to is a part of his address
space which is not mapped to actual RAM
in the process memory table the CPU
triggers a Hardware exception and the OS
then typically aborts the process with
an error message complaining about a
page fault because the maps chunks of
memory are called pages each page is
usually a set size which depends upon
the CPU 32-bit x86 processors for
example usually use 4 kilobyte pages so
in fact a more realistic diagram would
show that the stack heap and code
portions of a process address space are
most likely not mapped as whole units eg
each page of the stack may be mapped to
different non adjacent pages of RAM and
in no particular order to free up
valuable RAM the OS may decide to swap
out pages of a process to storage
usually a hard drive here for example
these pages of heap memory are not
currently mapped to any part of RAM
instead their data has been temporarily
copied out to a hard drive and in the
process memory table these heap pages
have been marked swapped and attempt by
the process to access an address in a
swapped page will trigger an exception
at which point the OS will copy the
swaps page back to rim and adjust the
memory table accordingly before allowing
the process to proceed thanks to
swapping the total memory used by all
processes may actually exceed the
capacity of RAM in the system swapping
pages in and out of storage is of course
relatively slow but better that the
system occasionally goes a bit slow to
swap pages rather than simply cease the
function by running out of memory with
swap in the processes can use as much
memory space as the system has free
storage in practice the small pages in a
typical PC at any moment will rarely
exceed more than a gigabyte or two of
storage but most pages used by most
processes don't get used very frequently
so they might as well sit in swap space
most of the time in its life cycle a
process transitions through a few major
States after the OS does all the
business it needs at time of process
creation the process transitions into
the waiting state the sense of waiting
here is waiting to be selected by the
scheduler when the scheduler selects the
process to run and then of course enters
the running state when the scheduler
selects a different process to run on
the same core this process is placed
back into the waiting State a process
typically goes back and forth many times
between waiting and running until the
process ends at which point it enters
its final state terminated there is at
least one more important state blocked
in the blocked State the process is
waiting for some external event in the
system before can proceed rather than
waiting to be scheduled so it is in
neither the state of running nor so cold
waiting most commonly the block state is
triggered when a process invokes certain
system calls such as for reading files
reading a file often blocks the process
because most storage devices such as
hard drives are relatively much slower
than the operations of the CPU and often
a program cannot do anything useful
until it gets the data it needs from a
file in such cases the process might as
well relinquish the CPU core it was
using and take itself out of the wading
pool allowing other processes to run
while it waits once the operating system
finishes retrieving the requested data
from storage it unblocks the process
putting it back into the waiting state
so that the scheduler will consider it
again for execution once the operating
system finishes retrieving the requested
data from storage it
blocks the process putting it back into
the waiting state so that the scheduler
will consider it again for execution so
don't get confused
both the blocked and waiting states
involve waiting but only in the waiting
state will the scheduler select the
process to run in the block state the
process waits until the OS puts it back
in the waiting state there are several
reasons to block and unblock a process
but the most common reason is because
that process has to wait for some slow
device in the system
as we've mentioned device drivers handle
the business of how exactly to talk to
an i/o device and that includes storage
devices like hard drives
however operating systems provide an
extra layer of abstraction for storage
devices called the file system which
presents storage space as a hierarchy of
directories and files stored in those
directories when your program uses a
hard drive for example you don't want to
have to concern yourself with the
details of moving heads and spinning
platters you just want to read and write
data and contiguous you and it's called
files and you want to have those files
organized into directories the file
system provides a subtraction allowing
program is to read and write data from
any kind of storage in the same way
whether a hard drive an optical disk a
flash drive or whatever the storage area
of each drive is divided into one or
more contiguous chunks called partitions
notice that some areas of the drive may
be left blank unformatted such as the
gap between the second and third
partitions of this first hard drive
most commonly though a drive is
formatted to have just one partition
occupying its entire storage area still
creating multiple partitions serve some
niche use cases such as installing
multiple operating systems on a single
drive in most partition formats use
today each file in directory within a
partition is known by an identifier
number unique within that partition so
here we have a partition with a file 35
and so we can have no other files within
that partition with the ID 35 nor any
directories with the ID 35 a file is
simply a logically contiguous chunk of
data a sequential series of bytes what
these bytes of a file represent is
entirely up to the program which writes
the file notice though I said that a
file is logically contiguous when bytes
are read and written by a program the
program sees them is a contiguous
sequential series but a file stored on
disk may actually be stored non
contiguous li and out of order it's a
responsibility of the filesystem to
ensure that the logical order gets
reconstructed when the file data is sent
to a program a directory quite simply is
a list of files and other directories on
the partition the directory associates
ID numbers for files or directories with
names names which must be unique amongst
all other files of directories listed in
that same directory so within a
directory you can have a file and
directory both names say Albert but you
can't have more than one file named Al
or more than one directory named Albert
when a partition is newly created it
starts out with no files and no
directories except for one special
directory called the root directory
which cannot be deleted
in Windows each partition is assigned a
drive letter usually denoted with a
suffix : for example C : H :
D : etc a file path is a string of text
denoting the location on the system of a
file or directory in Windows the root
directory on these drives are known by
the paths C : / H : / and D : /
respectively the path C : / Adam / Nixon
refers to a file or directory named
Nixon listed in a directory Adams itself
listed in the root directory on the C
partition the path H : / Taylor / polk /
Hayes refers to a file or directory
named Hayes listed in a directory Polk
listed in a directory Taylor listed in
the root directory on the H partition
the path D : / Garfield refers to a file
or directory named Garfield listed in
the root directory on the d partition
while the preferred convention in
Windows file paths is to use backslashes
for slashes work just as well and UNIX
however file paths must use forward
slashes the other major difference in
UNIX is that partitions are not assigned
the drive letters instead one partition
is mounted at root meaning that the path
slash refers to the root directory on
that partition each additional partition
is then made accessible by mounting it
to some directory on some other already
mounted partition here partition 2 is
mounted to root and then partition 1 is
mounted to the directory / banana on
partition 2 and in turn partition 3 is
mounted to the slash banana / apple on
partition 1 so be clear that / banana
becomes synonymous with the root
directive partition 1 such that / banana
/ Apple must refer to a directory Apple
in the root of partition 1
with these partitions mounted like this
the path / banana / Adam / Nixon now
refers to a file or directory named
Nixon listed in the directory Adams
listed in the route of partition 1 the
path / Taylor / Polk / Hayes now refers
to a file or directory named Hayes
listed in the directory Polk listed in
the directory Taylor listed in the route
of partition 2 the path / banana / apple
/ Garfield refers to a file our
directory named Garfield listed in the
root directory of partition 3 UNIX
systems generally require that a
directory already exists before can be
used as a mount point if the mountain
directory lists any files or directories
those entries are effectively obscured
by the mounting so when we mount
partition 1 the slash banana on
partition 2 we can no longer access the
content of that directory because /
banana now resolves to the root
directory of partition 1
IPC inter-process communication is an
umbrella term for any mechanism of the
CPU that facilitates communication
between processes the simplest kind of
IPC files can be read and written by
multiple processes and those can service
channels of communication between them
other mechanisms include pipes network
and sockets signals and shared memory
and we'll discuss some of these in the
unit on UNIX system calls
you